--- PAGE 1 ---
 
Calibration of a Six-Port-Based CW Radar 
Using Unknown Positions of a Target 
 
Kamil Staszek 
Institute of Electronics 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
Krakow, Poland 
kamil.staszek@agh.edu.pl
Abstract—In this paper a new approach to calibrate 
continuous-wave radars that utilize a six-port interferometer, is 
proposed. The presented procedure makes use of an arbitrary 
number of unknown target’s positions and is suitable for 
nearfield application. With this calibration method also a target 
that changes its radar cross-section along the measured distance 
can be used. The procedure was tested utilizing a six-port-based 
continuous-wave radar operating at 2.35 GHz for various 
number of target’s positions and their spread, showing the 
obtainable distance measurement error not exceeding 0.012 of 
the wavelength. Furthermore, the obtained measurement error 
distribution allows for defining simple and practical guidelines 
for calibrating radars with the use of the proposed method. 
Keywords—continuous-wave radar, six-port network, 
interferometer, calibration, distance measurement 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Continuous-wave (CW) radars are widely used as they 
constitute the simplest microwave circuitry enabling remote 
sensing. Although the most common topology of CW radars 
involves frequency conversion realized with the use of mixers 
[1], solutions utilizing six-port (multiport) interferometers are 
also reported [2]. In contrast to their mixer-based counterparts, 
they comprise a correlator which combines the signal reflected 
from a target (radiated and captured by the radar) with an 
internally formed reference signal. An interference of these 
two signals is directly measured with the use of RF power 
detectors with no frequency conversion, what makes the 
circuitry simpler and improves the measurement linearity [3]. 
The mentioned interferometer can be realized as a passive 
multiport power distribution network. Its number of ports and 
the inner power distribution scheme together with the power 
detectors’ measurement uncertainty define the final 
measurement performance [4]. In general, a higher number of 
power detectors (meaning also a higher number of ports of the 
distribution network) provides lower measurement 
uncertainty. The trade-off however, is a larger and more 
complex circuitry. Therefore, the most common 
interferometers are six-ports ones, as they contain the 
minimum number of three power detectors needed for an 
ambiguous measurement [5]. The remaining ports serve as 
excitation port, measurement port, and a port to which an 
additional power detector is connected, which can be used 
e.g., for power level monitoring. 
In order to provide a reliable measurement such a radar 
must be beforehand calibrated. In general, methods for 
calibration of interferometer-based CW radars can be divided 
into two groups. The first one is constituted by procedures, 
which require to take several measurements of power  
 
 
Fig. 1. A generic diagram of a six-port-based CW radar. 
measured by the mentioned power detectors for a target 
located in several known positions. An example of such a 
procedure used for calibration a six-port-based CW radar 
operating at 24 GHz is reported in [6]. It provides an excellent 
distance measurement performance at the expense of high 
computational effort and the need for precise knowledge of 
the target positions utilized for calibration. Both these aspects 
may be particularly difficult in low-cost applications. On the 
other hand, there are method utilizing the power readings for 
unknown, but reasonably chosen target’s locations [7]. They 
offer lower accuracy; however, they can be implemented in 
systems of lower computational capacity. In majority of these 
calibration methods, it is required that the same target is used 
and it reflects microwave signal uniformly, hence the 
measured radar echo exhibits a regular spiral shape having a 
radius that exponentially decreases with increasing target’s 
distance [8]. However, in general the target’s illumination 
may not be identical for all positions, particularly if the target 
is not in farfield, but it is located close to the radar. In such a 
case the spiral mentioned above becomes deteriorated and 
such conditions affect the calibration performance, decreasing 
the measurement quality. 
In this paper, a novel procedure for calibration of six-port-
based CW radars is proposed. It utilizes a recently reported 
method [9], which was initially designated to calibrate six-port 
reflectometers. The presented procedure utilizes unknown 
target’s positions, and does not require constant illumination 
of the target by radar, which makes it also suitable for radar 
calibration in a nearfield, in contrast to other reported 
solutions. The method is tested against the required number of 
the target’s positions and their spread over the measured 
distance with the use of a six-port-based CW radar operating 
at 2.35 GHz. It is shown that for a large set of different target’s 
positions used in the calibration the distance measurement 
error does not exceed 1.5 mm (0.012λ) over the range of 
320 mm. 
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
A general diagram of a six-port-based CW radar is 
illustrated in Fig. 1. The key element is the passive power 
distribution network, which is fed by RF signal from a signal 
source connected to port #1. This signal is distributed to 
port #2, to which antenna is connected and to ports #3 – #6  
 
This work was supported by the Statutory Research of Institute of 
Electronics AGH. 
978-83-956020-3-0 ©2022 Warsaw University of Technology
MIKON-2022,Gdańsk, PolandAuthorized licensed use limited to: Akademia Gorniczo-Hutnicza. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 14:48:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Fig. 2.  Reflection coefficients of the antenna measured by an ideal six-port-
based CW radar for eight target’s positions equally  distributed over the 
distance equal to wavelength. 
equipped with power detectors P 1 – P 3 and P REF . Next, the 
signal emitted by the antenna reflects from a target located at 
the distance D and is received by the antenna and distributed 
by the six-port network to power detectors P 1 – P3. Taking the 
above signal propagation into account, the measured  signal 
can be interpreted as the complex reflection coeffi cient Γ 
defined as: 
 =  + 	
    (1) 
where Γ 0 is the reflection coefficient of the utilized antenna in 
free space and Γ T represents the reflection from target. 
Simultaneously, γ = α + jβ is a complex propagation constant, 
which introduces exponential decrease of the magnit ude and 
linear phase shift of the signal along with the dis tance D. 
Hence, the reflection coefficients measured subsequ ently for 
increasing distance D form a spiral on a complex plane, as 
shown in Fig. 2. The center of that spiral is located in Γ 0, which 
can be determined e.g., by taking the measurement w hen no 
target is in the antenna’s field of view. After sub tracting Γ 0 
value, the distance D can be determined from the following 
expression: 
 =


arg  −    (2) 
where λ is the wavelength at the frequency of opera tion. It 
should be emphasized that for each CW radars utiliz ing a 
single frequency the range of unambiguously measure d 
distance D is limited to λ/2. 
In general, the relation between the measured power P1-P3 
and the reflection coefficient Γ takes the following form [10]: 
 =   +  +  +  +  +  (3) 
where ai and bi (i = 1, 2, 3) are system constants need to be 
found prior to the measurement. For an ideal six-po rt-based 
radar the value of Γ measured for a large number of  target’s 
positions form the spiral shown in Fig. 2. However,  a 
utilization of (3) with ideal parameters ai and bi for a real 
power distribution network makes the spiral more elliptic and 
shifted on the complex plane. These effects are pre sented in 
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 for different number of target’s positions N 
and their spread L defined as a distance between the first and 
the last one. Such a deterioration results from magnitude- and 
phase-imbalance of the power distribution network a nd non-
identical sensitivity of power detectors [10]. 
III.  DESCRIPTION OF THE CALIBRATION ALGORITHM  
The algorithm utilized in the radar calibration has  been 
recently reported in [9]. Although it was intended for 
reflectometers, due to close relation between the m easured 
distance D and the reflection coefficient Γ described in the  
 
  
  
Fig. 3.  Reflection coefficients of the antenna measured a r eal uncalibrated 
six-port-based CW radar for different number of tar get’s positions N and 
fixed spread L = 1.5λ defined as a distance between the first and  the last 
position. 
 
  
  
Fig. 4.  Reflection coefficients of the antenna measured a r eal uncalibrated 
six-port-based CW radar for fixed number of target’ s positions N = 6 and 
different spread L defined as a distance between the first and the last position. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Akademia Gorniczo-Hutnicza. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 14:48:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
previous section, this algorithm can successfully be applied in 
CW radars as well. It utilizes an arbitrary number N of 
calibration constants having unknown reflection coefficients, 
which (in the considered radar application) corresp onds to N 
unknown target’s locations. Furthermore, the algorithm does 
not impose any particular requirements on magnitudes of the 
calibration constants. Therefore, the target used in calibration 
can be arbitrary illuminated, as the reflected sign al’s 
magnitude does not need to follow any particular trend as e.g., 
in [7]. This advantage makes this algorithm especially suitable 
for calibration in a nearfield, or for a target tha t changes its 
radar cross-section along with the distance (e.g., rotating 
object). 
Next to the arbitrary magnitude, the phase of calib ration 
constants utilized in the considered algorithm can also be 
arbitrary, which means that the target’s locations used for 
radar calibration can also be arbitrary. There is, however, one 
phase-related requirement that is crucial to the calibration. To 
run the algorithm, it must be determined if the sub sequent 
reflection coefficients rotate clockwise or counter-clockwise. 
Therefore, the subsequent target’s distances must be generally 
increasing or decreasing and this fact must be given as an input 
to the algorithm. It should be underlined that part icular 
distances between these positions do not have to be equal, and 
some deterioration of the assumed direction may occ ur. 
However, the overall decreasing or increasing character of the 
distance values must be clearly seen. This is needed to provide 
correct phase orientation for the algorithm. Failin g this will 
result in inverse sign if the measured reflection c oefficient’s 
phase, which will inverse the sign of the measured distance. 
This is the only requirement regarding the target’s  positions, 
which in practice means that a distance between two  
consecutive target’s positions should be not greate r than λ/4 
(phase difference < 180°). As seen it does not intr oduce any 
practical limitations. In Fig. 4 it is seen that fo r N = 6 and 
L = 2λ the phase difference for subsequent reflectio n 
coefficients exceeds 180°, which is incorrectly interpreted by 
the algorithm, and in turn leads to inversed sign o f the 
measured reflection coefficient’s phase and therefore inversed 
distance D. 
As mentioned above, the calibration algorithm uses 
arbitrary and unknown magnitudes and phases of the 
reflection coefficients. Hence, it provides a free choice of 
target’s positions. However, as described in [9], to obtain the 
algorithm’s convergence the measured reflection coefficients 
should cover possibly large range of both magnitude  and 
phase. In the considered radar application this con dition 
indicates that the chosen target’s positions should  also 
distinctly vary. By enlarging the spread L also the range of the 
measured reflection coefficients’ magnitudes increases, which 
is crucial to the algorithm’s convergence. However,  for a 
given N, one can find the value of L for which the reflection 
coefficients form a straight line ( N = 4 or N = 7 and L = 1.5λ 
shown in Fig. 3), which obviously would not lead to  
calibration’s convergence. Hence, the optimum numbe r of 
target’s positions N and their spread L need to be found. 
IV.  MEASUREMENT SETUP  
For the described search of the optimum N and L values a 
six-port-based CW radar presented in Fig. 5 was use d. It 
operates at the frequency of 2.35 GHz, utilizes the  
interferometer described in [11], and is fed with + 15 dBm of 
power. The power measurement was realized using thr ee  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 5.  The measurement setup in an anechoic chamber: (a) s ix-port-based 
CW radar and corner reflector on a robotic arm and (b) closer view of the 
radar. 
integrated power detectors LTC5587 equipped with bu ilt-in 
12-bit ADCs. To suppress their nonlinear responses three 
dedicated Look-Up Tables were applied. The utilized  radar 
has separate antenna for transmitting and receiving, however, 
the relation between the received radar echo and th e power 
values P1 – P3 can be described by (3) as well, hence the 
described algorithm can be applied with no modifications. The 
only difference for the radar having two antennas with respect 
to a radar with a single antenna is that the center of the spiral 
Γ0 in (1) corresponds to the isolation between these two 
antennas, which in practice can be lower than the r eflection 
coefficient of a single antenna. As the target a corner reflector 
having the outer edges’ length of 100 mm was used. To set the 
target at an arbitrary distance from the radar a robotic arm was 
utilized. A photograph of the developed measurement  setup 
located in an anechoic chamber is shown in Fig. 5. 
V.  RADAR ’S CALIBRATION  
To find the optimum N and L values the following 
procedure was performed. The target was placed in front if the 
radar’s antennas at the distance D varying from 100 mm to 
420 mm with the step of 0.1 mm. For each position the power 
readings P1 – P3 were acquired. Further, from the collected 
3201 sets of power readings N sets of power readings  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Akademia Gorniczo-Hutnicza. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 14:48:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 6.  (a) The maximum and (b) RMS distance measurement er ror 
obtained for different number of target’s positions  N and different spread L 
defined as a distance between the first and the las t position. Measurements 
performed with the use of the six-port-based CW rad ar at the frequency of 
2.35 GHz, for the distance range from 100 mm to 420 mm. 
corresponding to the target’s positions with the spread L were 
selected and used as the input to the calibration algorithm. The 
procedure was executed for each N value from 3 to 20, and for 
the spread L values falling between 0 and 2.5λ (320 mm). 
Moreover, for each tested set of positions the first position was 
the one of 100 mm from the radar. Having this large  number 
of calibration results, the collected power reading s for 3201 
target’s positions were used to calculate the targe t’s distance 
using (3), in which the coefficients ai and bi were taken from 
the corresponding calibration results. Finally, the  calculated 
distance was compared against the genuine one and t he 
maximum and RMS values of errors were calculated for each 
considered set of N and L values. The obtained measurement 
error distributions are illustrated in Fig. 6. 
Analyzing the measured distance errors’ distribution a few 
conclusions can be formulated. First, the range of target’s 
positions L should exceed 0.5λ to cover at least full 360°-range 
of the signal Γ, which is used to calculate the dis tance. 
Furthermore, for a given number of the utilized pos itions N 
the spread L cannot be too large, as it may lead to fail the phase 
condition described in Section III and shown as the  last 
example in Fig. 4. As a consequence, the sign of the measured 
distance is incorrect and manifests itself in large  errors. It is 
seen in the bottom right corner of the errors’ distributions. The 
final conclusion is that the number of target’s position N does 
not need to be high, since there is no observable improvement 
of the measurement error for increasing N. Simultaneously, 
the computational effort for the utilized algorithm  
significantly increases with N. 
VI.  CONCLUSIONS  
In this paper, a procedure for calibration six-port -based 
CW radars was proposed. It makes use of N unknown target’s 
positions, which do not have to be known. Moreover,  the 
utilized algorithm is robust to the magnitude of th e received 
radar’s echo, which makes the proposed approach suitable for 
nearfield application and/or a calibration with the use a target 
that changes its radar cross-section at different positions. The 
proposed calibration procedure was tested with the use of the 
six-port-based CW radar operating at the frequency of 
2.35 GHz for the target’s distances between 100 mm and 
420 mm. Over this range different numbers of calibr ation 
positions as well as their different spacing were tested against 
the obtainable distance measurement error. The distribution of 
the maximum and RMS error values confirms that such radars 
can be successfully calibrated following the proposed method 
and provides a simple guideline helping to select t he target’s 
positions leading to the minimum measurement errors. 
REFERENCES  
[1]  M. Reznicek, P. Bezousek, “Commercial CW Doppler radar design and 
application,” in Prof. 27th International Conference Radioelektronika 
(RADIOELEKTRONIKA) , Brno, Chech Republic, Jun. 2017, pp. 1-5. 
[2]  E. Moldovan, S.-O. Tatu, T. Gaman, K. Wu, “A new 94-GHz six-port 
collision-avoidance radar sensor,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory 
Techn. , vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 751-759, Mar. 2004. 
[3]  S. O. Tatu, A. Serban, M. Helaoui, and A. Koelpin, “Multiport 
technology: The new rise of an old concept,” IEEE Microwave 
Magazine , vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 34-44, Nov. 2014. 
[4]  K. Staszek, S. Gruszczynski, and K. Wincza, “Theore tical limits and 
accuracy improvement of reflection coefficient meas urements in six-
port reflectometers,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn. , vol. 61, no. 
8, pp. 2966-2974, Aug. 2013. 
[5]  F. M. Ghannouchi, A. Mohammadi, The six-port technique with 
microwave and wireless applications . Norwood, MA, USA: Artech 
House 2009. 
[6]  K. Staszek, S. Linz, F. Lurz, S. Mann, R. Weigel, A . Koelpin, 
“Improved calibration procedure for six-port based precise 
displacement measurements,” in Proc. IEEE Topical Conference on 
Wireless Sensors and Sensor Networks (WiSNet),  Austin, USA, Jan. 
2016, pp. 60-63. 
[7]  S. Linz, G. Vinci, S. Lindner, S. Mann, F. Lurz, F. Barbon, R. Weigel, 
and A. Koelpin, “I/Q imbalance compensation for six -port 
interferometers in radar applications,” in Proc. 44th European 
Microwave Conference , Rome, Italy, Dec. 2014, pp. 6-9. 
[8]  C. Will, S. Linz, S. Mann, F. Lurz, S. Lindner, R. Weigel, and A. 
Koelpin, “Segmental polynomial approximation based phase error 
correction for precise near field displacement measurements using Six-
Port microwave interferometers,” in Proc. IEEE Topical Conference on 
Wireless Sensors and Sensor Networks (WiSNet),  Phoenix, USA, Jan. 
2017, pp. 23-25. 
[9]  K. Staszek, “Six-port calibration utilizing matched load and unknown 
calibration loads,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn ., vol. 66, no. 
10, pp. 4617-4626, Oct. 2018. 
[10]  R. Smolarz, K. Staszek, K. Wincza, S. Gruszczynski,  “A 24 GHz 
microwave sensor with built-in calibration capabili ty designed in 
MMIC technology,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, no. , pp. 31513-31524, Mar. 
2021. 
[11]  K. Staszek, S. Gruszczynski, and K. Wincza, “Six-po rt reflectometer 
providing enhanced power distribution,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory 
Techn ., vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 939-951, Mar. 2016. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Akademia Gorniczo-Hutnicza. Downloaded on November 09,2022 at 14:48:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 